i'm mateus ood since 20 years I'm
working together with Christoph Wachter
not exactly on blockchain but we are
looking into the power structure of our
communication possibilities in 2014 we
have been invited by the Swiss Embassy
in Berlin to present our art projects
and this invitation really thrilled us
because the Swiss Embassy in Berlin is
special as it sits right next to the
federal Chancellery no one is closer to
Chancellor Merkel than the Swiss
diplomats the government district in
Berlin also contains the right stock
which is Germany's Parliament and the
Brandenburg Gate and right next to the
gate there are other embassies in
particular the US and British Embassy
although Germany is an advanced
democracy citizens are limited in their
constitutional rights in this government
government district the right of
assembly and the right to demonstrate
are restricted there and this is
interesting from an artistic point of
view our opportunities to exercise
participation and to express ourselves
are always bound to a certain order if
we become aware of the constellation the
terms and conditions of our
communication in not only broadens our
horizons it allows us to look behind
regulation that limit our world view
over the last years we learned that from
the roofs of the American and British
embassies the secret services had been
listening to the entire district
including the mobile phone of Angela
Merkel the antennas of the British GCHQ
were hidden in a white cylindrical
rhythm while the listening post of the
American NSA is covered by radio
transparent screens but how to address
these hidden and disguised forces we
accepted the invitation by the Swiss
Embassy and used its opportunity to
exploit the specific situation
if people are spying on us it stands to
reason that they have to listen to what
we are saying and roofless of the swiss
embassy we installed a series of
antennas they weren't as sophisticated
as those used by the Americans and the
British
they were makeshift can--it Anna's not
come flush but totally obvious invisible
and then the Academy of Arts joined a
project and so we built an other large
antenna on their rooftop exactly between
the life listening posts of the NSA and
the GCHQ never have we been observed in
such detail while building an art
installation a helicopter was circling
over our heads with a camera registering
each and every move we made and on the
roof of the US embassy security officers
patrolled although the government
district in Berlin is governed by a
strict police order there are no
specific laws relating to digital
communication our installation was
therefore perfectly legal and the Swiss
ambassador even informed Chancellor
Merkel about it we can't a project can
you hear me the antennas created an open
and free Wi-Fi communication network in
which anyone who wanted to would be able
to participate using any Wi-Fi enabled
device and be able to send messages to
those listening on the frequencies that
were being intercepted text messages
voice chats file-sharing anything could
be sent anonymously and people did
communicate over 15,000 messages were
sent here are some examples hello world
hello Berlin hello NSA hello GCHQ this
is the NSA's Achilles heel open networks
NSA agents do the right thing
blow the whistle this is the NSA In God
We Trust all others we track
agents what twisted story of yourself
will you tell your grandchildren this
one I'm not going to read but it means
do not spy on me in the binary
representation of ASCII code make love
not cyber war at NSA my neighbor's a
noisy police send a drone strike
anonymous is watching NSA GCHQ we are
part of your organization's expect us we
will shut down can you hear me created
platform to discuss the potential and
the limits of communication we invited
the embassies and government departments
to participate in this open Network
- and to our surprise they did files
appeared on the network including
classified documents leaked from a
parliamentary investigation Commission
which highlights that the free exchange
and discussion of information is
starting to become difficult even for
members of a parliament the project can
you hear me was reeling because it
showed how the permeating regime of
surveillance can be challenged and
disrupted if different positions come
together an accidental passerby a member
of the government a diplomat all those
different positions find together in a
mouthpiece of self-reliance and
resistance we are always part of a
specific setting with our communication
possibilities through it we gain or lose
agency since over 10 years we are
examine our ex mining the forms of
rating ranking filtering of
communication possibilities and
information access within our projects
to infiniment the infinite freedom of a
virtual space was unveiled as an
illusion the World Wide Web
the platform for global data exchange is
quite diverse heterogeneous formation
many nations have an active internet
censorship here is a collection of
examples this is the censored block side
from Iran a proxy service censored in
Thailand a censored block in Switzerland
Flickr for example is censored in the
Emirates this is a blocked porn site in
Germany and this is the Wikipedia site
censored in China some censorship is
disguised others inform the censorship
about a censorship through the webpage
we realized several open source project
they serve as an invitation to explore
the borders of one's own perception for
all participants in every specific
situation even in heavily censored and
surveilled situations such as in the
Chinese internet cafes doing that we got
in contact with Internet users and
activists from all around the world to
our own surprise even from northern
Korea especially the narratives of
Twitter and Facebook revolutions are
traps the first so called Twitter
revolution in Iran in 2009 exposed
itself not to be the mass movement of
Iranian activists but of an
english-speaking trout in the Western
world as during the protests on the
ground mostly the contrary happened a
shutdown of the internet on this list
you see some of the internet shutdowns
in the past decade due to political
reasons but how to communicate during an
Internet and mobile service shutdown
like the one that happened in Ethiopia
in 2016
in the last year's not only the network
and the possibility of surveillance
changed but also the devices in our
hands they became very complex and
powerful machines this allowed us to set
up a system that interconnects life
enable computers and smartphones by a
software to an independent communication
mesh network the open source software is
modular Li built and can be extended
this independent redundant open
communication place principle gives us
another possibility to communicate in
digital communication network users are
depending from the network itself from
infrastructure from service providers
since 2011 we do develop call net the
open source software connects different
devices directly over Wi-Fi
it works therefore without a mobile
telephone network and without any
central server the program can be passed
on like a virus from user to user when a
new user it is covered survive I cannot
access one can download the software
from this very connection after the
installation one can use it immediately
and pass it on to others see own
activists were with the first who joined
the project they started to use the
software and developed it with us
Wi-Fi has a range limit without any
obstacles this limit between the router
and the devices is about 250 meter we
built antennas out of cheap and simple
material so called can antennas they can
focus all the radio waves in one
direction and make much longer
connections there are also some
limitations in the Wi-Fi protocol but
they can be changed when one is using
open and free Wi-Fi
divers in 2014 we have been invited to
Istanbul to give a series of workshops
also in the Asian part of the town south
of the Bosphorus people started building
independent networks and connections on
the basis of calm and one before
one here before our rifle demonstration
started against the construction
approach project on the terrain of the
Casey Park in Istanbul the demonstration
screw after a violent police
intervention and hard reactions of Prime
Minister Adam the protests turned
against the government and tear
authoritarian politics people in other
Turkish cities connected to the demands
and started protesting to the gezi Park
became a symbol of civil resistance
against the government and against
police violence Prime Minister a Diwan
became a controversial latest with the
Casey Park protests there were
allegations of corruption the Turkish
money municipal elections in spring 2014
became crucial for the political
direction of Turkey to prevent
publications critical to the government
the Turkish authorities blocked Twitter
and short time later YouTube - the
blocking was first done in the form of a
DNS censorship which is you may know
that relatively simple to circumvent by
just entering another DNS server in your
device's network communication settings
censorship got worse
during our stay in Istanbul in spring
2014 when the whole DNS traffic soundly
was overtaken - no matter what server
and was then controlled fully by the
authorities over 40,000 web sites were
blocked at that time
in Turkey often the world wide web is
seen as a tactical media it is seen as a
medium for counter statements
enlightenment and critique the platforms
are not reliable partners for political
activists though Facebook for example
requests clear names from its users it
regulates user-generated content in
accordance with the government's and
deletes accounts of political activists
Twitter and Yahoo pass on personal data
to the authorities activists are
prosecuted in many countries for the
online expression together with
activists we developed an extended
version of call net based on their
experience from the KC Park protest
Network outages happen often during
protests also in the KC Park this can be
the consequence of specific switch offs
or also due to the congestion of the
existing networks we developed
independent and mobile stations that can
run even during power outages or network
failures to allow local communication
two aspects have been important for the
independent Network communication within
the demonstration should be in short and
secondly information about the
demonstration should be passed on
anonymously the stations can be used for
text messages voice chats and file
sharing the gezi Park additions allows
links to the internet and other networks
information can be exchanged even
time-delayed the situation in Turkey has
developed further nowadays over one
house 100,000 websites are blocked and a
new presidential system of Turkey gives
president Adam even greater powers
anonymity is often confused with
encryption but even with encryption many
information are visible this data are
often called metadata for example the IP
address message lengths etc and
sometimes even more than metadata for
example the subject and a receiver here
in an example of a GPG encrypted email
in this Internet independent and local
networks that we build people are not
identifiable by their SIM card or their
IP address as the addresses are purely
random and the messages travel over hubs
we have created a situation from which
we contemplate the specific
communication options and limitations we
can then specifically address and
overcome them we should not take it for
granted to be boundlessly connected we
can't start making our own connections
fighting for the idea of an equal and
globally interconnected world this is
essential to overcome our speechlessness
and the separation provoked by rival
political forces the fate of people
living in the makeshift settlements on
the outskirts of Paris is hidden and
faded from you it's a vicious circle
it's not poverty not racist that race is
not exclusion that are new but is new is
how these realities are hidden and how
people are made invisible in an age of
allegedly global an overwhelming
communication and exchange such
makeshift settlements are considered
illegal and therefore those living in
them don't have a chance of making their
voices heard on the contrary every time
they appear every time they risk
becoming visible merely gives ground for
further persecution expulsion and
suppression in France exists anti-terror
and anti copyright infringement laws
that require a permanent address and a
bank account in order to be able to get
an own internet access
these laws exclude the already
marginalized even more otherwise cut off
from the internet we created a very
special network to gather if the
families in the informal settlements
these networks interconnect
an informal settlement in the outskirts
of Paris this bicycle has been equipped
with a mini computer a numbers can
antennas commands can be sent via a
Wi-Fi connection for example sending or
checking emails or downloading music if
the bicycle is near an internet hotspot
it down dials in automatically and the
commands are executed the bicycle
connects people in informal settlements
with the Internet
this shows the file transfer back to the
settlement technically spoken it is a
delay tolerant Network and it comes with
an unconventional approach to privacy
because the last mile is self owned
private and offline let's take a look at
one last picture we took in 2015 on the
Greek island of Lesbos the hot spot
where many asylum seekers stranded in
the background you can see the Turkish
coast we have been working for years
with many asylum seekers and people on
the flight and I think it is very
important to remember how data traces
can be a blessing or a curse a blessing
when a signal can call for help and real
threat to life when someone is surveyed
or haunted in a war zone or in dangerous
escape routes thank you
[Applause]